This is August 22.
We're testing, testing, testing.
Hello, I'm testing.
This is August 22nd.
I have the pleasure and honor of chatting with longtime colleague and close friend Dr. Victor Hugo Treat Sr.
about his recollections and memories of almost four decades in Bryan College Station.
To begin with, Vic, describe for this tape and a stranger who might listen to it or read the transcript years from now,
Describe your background growing up, parents, and your experience before you got to College Station.
I was born in Matagorda, Texas, in a town called Old Gulf, which no longer existed.
It was a sulfur town, and my father was an engineer down there, and my grandfather also worked for the sulfur company there, Texas Freeport Sulfur, I think it was, and moved to Houston part of the time,
most of my life I spent in Houston.
I grew up, my father died when I was six and I was raised reared by my mother.
It was depression times and times were tough and hard but we got along fairly well because my mother was one of four sisters and a brother.
And we all kind of pooled together and lived together and, as I said, did not suffer many of the hardships that some people suffered.
We didn't have all of the thrills and many of the things that we have today, but we always have plenty of food and plenty of clothes.
My family was pretty active in church.
We belonged to Christ Church downtown Houston and my family was in the choir and were active in the church the whole time.
I attended Henderson Elementary School, which is still there I might add.
And then Johnston, Albert City Johnston Junior High School and then San Jacinto High School.
I grew up in an unusual neighborhood.
Most of my young teenage life and uptime I got married was in a Jewish neighborhood, so it was kind of unusual in that sense.
Many of my early friends were Jews and most of my life were Orthodox.
There was none of those Reformed things around those days.
And I attended San Jack, graduated, attended University of Houston, where I ran track, and was on a track scholarship, and did fairly well there.
Got married when I graduated from college in 1953, and then in 19, worked at various jobs which convinced me that I wanted to continue my education, working with Coca-Cola in a steel mill.
In 1955, my first child was born.
William J. Treat, and then my wife got married in 1953 to Joanne Harvolt, and we then moved to Austin where I attended graduate school at the University of Texas at Austin, and 1963 then came to Texas A&M and joined the history faculty.
How did you and A&M get together?
What happened for you to
first of all know there was a vacancy and how did you get that to fill that vacancy?
I had no intention of getting a job.
My wife had a very good job in Austin and we lived in University Housing for almost nothing and we were content to stay there for several more years.
I was one of the older
guys and so the various I was always given some of the cushier jobs and I was I taught at night at one of the local high schools and which paid better money and we really lived quite well.
I received a phone call one Saturday morning from a Dr. Cotner, William Cotner who was a real good friend close friend of Joseph Milton Nance at A&M who Nance was the head of the history and government department and so Cotner said he thought I'd come down and talk to
to Dr. Nance, and I was somewhat reluctant.
I said, okay, so I went down.
I really wasn't seeking a job and certainly didn't try to sell myself, and we chatted and talked, and all of a sudden, out of a clear blue sky, I had the job, and September 1963 came to A&M.
My wife Joanne stayed in Austin.
We lived in University Housing, had not finished a PhD yet, so we decided to stay there, and I came over here and lived here for half a year, almost three quarters of a year by myself then.
Do you remember any formal interview with Dr. Nance?
Yes, it was a formal interview I met in history.
Describe it.
Well, I walked in and sat down, and Dr. Nance was already there.
He did not get up, and I went in and sat down and introduced myself, and he began to ask me some questions.
He asked me some questions about history and what I thought about certain things, and he asked me about my background, my background,
church and religion and where I went to high school and and what I've done and some of the various jobs I've held and then that was it.
Did you get the impression that there might have been some answer you could have given that would have turned your chances away?
No not really I think he already having talked to Kotner I think already he had made his mind unless I really
pull some kind of boo-boo if I didn't want it, that the job was probably mine.
Back in those days, before all the fair play came in, most jobs were filled by friendship, I know you, you know me, and so on and so on.
Do you think he had asked Kotner questions about you?
Oh, I think so, yes.
That's why Kotner called me, and I was in good terms with Dr. Kotner.
The University of Texas back in that day was somewhat compartmentalized,
And in a sense, I don't want to make this sound, that was a really terrible thing, but in some sense, Dr. Kotner was not one of the inside group.
And as you well know, Dr. Nance was not always one of the inside group, and they've been good friends for a long, long time.
And did Dr. Nance, when the interview here was over, did he tell you yes or no, or did he tell you he'd be in contact with you?
Tell me I had a job, and he would send me papers.
He already knew when I walked out that he'd offer me the job.
And we won't talk about money anymore, but what was the beginning salary he offered you?
$6,000.
For nine months.
Did he describe what your task would be?
Yes, he said I would be teaching basic American history.
There were very few advanced courses, and I might teach government.
Back in those days, it was history and government, and many of the people, especially the younger ones who came in, filled in, and my minor was political science, so that didn't, it was government, called Texas, government here at A&M, as I recollect, and so that would have been fine with me because I certainly could have done that.
Did you accept on the spot, or do you remember?
No, I did not.
I said it sounded very good.
I needed to talk to my wife, and also I needed to talk to my
advisor who at that time was Barnes F. Lathrop and so I called Lathrop and he made a number of remarks and things and he finally told me that well A&M was a major school and he thought that there were some drawbacks but A&M he thought had promise and so I probably ought to take it.
What drawbacks do you think he foresaw?
Well it was still an all-male school.
And he thought that a lot of people here, he used the term marionettes.
And he thought that the military was pretty strong and that A&M was very, had many traditions that were not always good, he thought.
And I think he had probably the typical view of many people at the University of Texas at that time.
During that conversation with Dr. Nance, and this lasted about how long?
Oh gosh, 30 minutes, 45 minutes, not a long time.
Do you think that as you walked out, did you feel he had really endeavored to learn about you?
I think so.
He asked me a lot of questions about my background, education, childhood, beliefs, family, things like that, yes.
Did he ask you about anything that you thought was inappropriate?
No, I don't think so, no.
Of course, in hindsight, some of the things that he might have asked me in 1963 might very well consider inappropriate today, but back in 1963, it was still not inappropriate.
Because I'm assuming that he would have, it would have been more positive that you were a church attender to him, whereas today it might not be.
I think so, yes.
You had to be a better person if you attended church.
All right.
So then you moved over, that's in April?
No, that's in August.
In August?
Yeah, it was getting close.
Do you have any idea why he waited so long?
Had somebody... Have no idea.
Have no idea why they were doing it.
Whether they got some more money or decided to need somebody else or what then.
They had hired, the year before, they had hired another Texas Ray Stevens had gone from, gone over there and so.
Now, was this, were we still having Saturday classes?
Was this in the fall semester?
Yes, still Saturday classes, uh-huh.
Okay, so the fall semester began in mid-September.
Yeah.
And you moved over here.
What kind of housing did you find?
I rented a room in, by, from Mrs. Lancaster, Mrs. Lancaster over on the south side of campus, off Throckmorton, actually, what's that street now?
Dexter.
Dexter, yeah, off Dexter.
She had a big old house, and she rented rooms out, and I rented a room from her.
Remember what the rent was?
No, I don't.
It wasn't much, though, that's for sure.
And it wasn't heated, and I lived there up to December, I guess, through January, January.
And Joanne is still... Working in Austin.
In Austin.
And let's see, and Jay...
Is not yet... No, he was born in 55, you see, so he... Okay, so he stays in Austin.
He stays in Austin with his mother, yes, in school.
What did you teach that first semester?
Do you remember?
105, all 105.
I was lucky.
I was really expecting to have to teach some government, and so I'd gotten a...
government textbook and had reviewed national government and Texas government, because I fully expected to have to do it, because I'd been warned by some people, oh, you'll have to teach some government.
And so I thought, okay.
But I did not, I never taught any government.
How many sections?
Four.
They had just cut back from five, as I remember him.
And describe the physical location of the department in Nagel Hall.
We were on a second floor.
At that time, our offices were on opposite end and I was given a desk in a large office.
The office was occupied mainly by
Oh, good grief.
Garland Bayless and also then a guy named Anderson.
I don't remember his first name now, but he was actually government what he really was.
He officed in there and that was on the second floor and the dean's office was still in Neagle Building at that time, the dean's office.
Hubert was the dean.
In fact, when I went over to A&M to accept a job, I was personally interviewed by Hubert.
Back in those days, the dean interviewed every individual person and asked them questions and things like that then.
Do you remember the kinds of questions he asked?
No, I don't remember anything about it.
It was not a very long interview.
Describe how it was to get acquainted with this, the members of this faculty.
Well, it was very small.
And, of course, our office was Garland Bayless, and anyone who was Bayless knows he's very friendly, so he made me feel very, very much at home.
And Anderson was a nice,
guy.
As I recollect, he was a minister or a part-time minister, so he was very friendly, and it was a very small department, and it was pretty easy to get to know people.
Did you get the impression there were any senior people who were more influential than any others?
Yes, I got that pretty quickly.
It seemed pretty clear that Nance was, thought a great deal of Lloyd Taylor's opinions, and
I think that maybe not many more Nance respected Lloyd Taylor and I think that most of the other people not so.
Was Dr. Nelson still active?
Yes.
Screaming Owl was still there and he certainly was not considered influential and I think that Nance walked his own route pretty much.
And if he talked to anybody, it was largely, I think, Lloyd Taylor that he had opinions on.
Did anybody, Dr. Nance or anyone else, give you any kind of departmental guidelines, rules?
Oh, yes.
I was expected to dress and act like a college professor.
Now, that wasn't always spelled out, but I was expected to dress and act like a college professor, and I can remember very clearly
My wife bought me a whole new outfit, short Bermuda shorts, a nice shirt, new tennis shoes.
And one Saturday morning, I wore those out to school to do some work in the office.
And this was in 1964 or 65.
And Monday morning, it was a note in my box saying, see me.
And I was called into Dr. Nance's office and told me that he had noticed me on Saturday and that I was dressed inappropriately, he thought.
And since I don't believe in tilting windmills, I did not do it again.
Nowadays, we might do that deliberately and call someone's bluff, but I know people in our department who did that, if you remember Mr. Monroe, they weren't around very long.
Heads had power in those days.
What other rules?
Were there either spoken or unspoken?
Well, very clearly, you kept office hours.
Your door was left open.
It was an open door policy, and you were expected to be there pretty much from 8 to 5.
with your door open unless you were in class.
And you expect to be available for the students.
Let's see, in that era, did people smoke in their office?
Oh, sure, yeah.
People smoked in their office.
It was a common thing.
Did any of the other faculty members give you any advice?
Oh, it's kind of hard to remember that.
It's been, gosh, almost 40 years now.
I'm sure Bayless did.
Bayless, well, I know Bayless did because we chatted a good bit.
And, of course, they had me over for dinner and things like that.
And I cannot remember now.
I went over to Monroe's for dinner as well.
And I'm sure in those conversations, those two I can remember pretty clearly that undoubtedly they did make some remarks to me.
And were there some of the colleagues that struck you as interesting characters?
Oh, Lord.
Lloyd Taylor would be at the top of the list.
Lloyd and I started out by being enemies in a way.
We got cross lives at each other.
How so?
Well, one day a car was parked and I left my boy Jay in there with our little dog, Sparky.
And Sparky got out of the car and Jay was trying to get him back in the car.
And Jay was talking to him rough and poking at him, not going to hurt him.
And Lloyd Taylor went by and told him to quit doing that.
And if he didn't quit doing it, he'd come over and whip him.
And I came out of the office about that time, and someone telling my nine-year-old boy that he was going to whip him did not sit well with me, and so I very promptly told him exactly what I thought of him.
And Lloyd was very cool to me for several years, and one of those strange things, Lloyd was a very good friend of Alan Ashcraft, and Alan Ashcraft and I became good friends.
And once I became good friends with Alan Ashcraft and then Lloyd decided I wasn't too bad a guy and I was, went on my way to try to be nice to Lloyd and we became fast friends.
I have some pictures of Lloyds now that he gave me before he died.
What about other characters?
Well, Screaming Al, of course, it was one.
Names elude me right now.
Why did, why was he called Screaming Al?
Because he screamed.
He screamed in class.
About what?
Politics.
Al hated Franklin Roosevelt and students used to bait him.
They did it deliberately.
He could be teaching a course in 105, a long way from Franklin D. Roosevelt and students would bring up something about Franklin Roosevelt and that ended the class pretty quickly and Al was off running about and he hated Franklin Roosevelt and he hated John F. Kennedy.
Uh, let's see, other senior people in years of service would have been Dr. Bass.
He'd retired before I got here.
Oh, okay.
He was already retired when I came to 63.
So Claude Hall?
Claude Hall, Duncan.
Ah.
I did not get to know Claude Hall until a little bit later.
Claude officed in, down near the, near the head's office, and so he was kind of off limits, and I did not get to be a good friend with Claude until somewhat later.
We weren't, you know, we weren't enemies but we were never close until a good many years later then.
Duncan I got to know fairly well.
Describe him.
Duncan was already an older man and was one of those that had not finished his PhD and he taught Texas history and right at that time there were three or four people teaching Texas history.
Nance, Lloyd Miller, Duncan.
Tom Miller.
I mean Tom Miller.
And actually Ray Stevens was brought in that he might teach Texas history so, and I could teach Texas history to that matter.
There were four or five people in the department and there weren't that many classes in those days.
And you mentioned Alan Ashcraft.
Yes.
Alan Ashcraft was a Civil War historian, a very fine teacher, excellent with students and worked very hard at it.
and was one of our better lecturers probably as far as from the student viewpoint.
And he and I would get along with, I never understood why really, but he did not get along with Dr. Nance very well.
And no one ever seems to know why that was the case.
Let's see.
It was Charlie Wines.
Charlie Wines had already gone.
He'd already gone.
I'm trying to think of others.
Did you or anybody else think that Dr. Nance had any pets?
Anybody that he gave special?
No, not really.
It seemed pretty clear that he and Lloyd Taylor were close together because he went down his office lots of times.
In fact, Taylor's the only one I know, and that's not quite true, Claude Hall.
If I had to pick a second person that he talked to, and of course, Herb Lang.
Now, I became...
These people I became friends with a little bit later.
I knew Monroe and Bayless earlier.
As time went on, I became very good friends with Herb Lang and also Lloyd.
If I had to pick the two people or three people that Nance talked to the most, and I don't think necessarily their pets, it would of course be Lloyd Taylor, Herb Lang, and Claude Hall.
And they were senior people.
Describe Herb Lang.
Well, for a Yankee, he was more Southern acting than anyone else probably.
He almost came on as a Southern gentleman.
He worked very hard for his students.
He was a very good teacher.
I think the least you could say about him is that he's a gentleman.
He was a gentleman in the old school, and so would Claude Hallby.
They were both gentlemen of the old school.
Describe a typical, in those years, a typical departmental meeting.
Well, we met together.
In the early days, of course, government would have been with us, and there were very few questions from the floor.
Dr. Nance talked and described what was going on, and then the meeting was over pretty much.
That year or two when political science, as they wanted to be called then, were splitting away, they frequently raised some questions and made accusations about how they weren't being treated fair and that Dr. Nance was trying to block them from separating, which was not true.
most of us understood that Dr. Nance would like to get rid of them, you know, and put them all over there.
There were more troublemakers in that area than there were in the history department.
Do you remember going to any kind of social event at the Nance's home in your early months?
Yes.
Nance frequently.
We went over there for dinner one time by ourselves.
It was a private thing, and we ate.
And then I guess the first year or two we were here,
He also had general social function where the whole department was invited.
But those didn't last.
They then stopped somewhere in the middle, late 60s, I believe.
Now, describe his work habits.
Well, he was always there probably by 7, 7.30 in his office.
And he stayed until 5.
He was there.
Unless he walked over for coffee, he was a coffee drinker.
And so every morning he walked over for coffee and met some of his friends.
I don't think he went to his department very often.
I don't remember him really going to the department too often.
He met other people over there.
And then he stayed until 5 or 5.30.
Am I correct in recalling that he didn't think we should have a coffee pot in Nagel's room?
That's right, yeah.
If you wanted, you could walk over to the MSC and do it over there then.
That's what I always thought, that he didn't think it was a good thing for us to have it there, but it was all right.
Well, you'd congregate there too much, I think, probably, that sort of thing.
And did you have the impression that he was doing research, that he was also working scholarly?
Oh, yes.
If he wasn't in the office, he was in the library.
And he always had something on his desk he was working on just about then.
Who were the key secretaries in those years?
Do you remember?
I don't remember.
I don't either.
There was one lady, an older woman, who was there for a long time.
And I just don't remember now.
That's terrible.
I should have remembered their names.
And the office was at the west end of the second floor of Nagel.
Right.
And the dean's office was straight opposite the head of the stairway in the middle of the second floor.
We had most of the offices on that second floor.
Well, and the third.
Some on the third, yeah.
And then economics on the second, on the first.
First.
and in some geography.
Geology was in that first basement and journalism.
I'm not sure how long geology and geography stayed there, but Fred Smith was there.
His nickname, of course, was Fat Freddy.
I don't know what he said, but he had an office there for good many years when I first came.
Did you meet in those early months some people in other departments or?
Oh yes, I got to know some people in economics, got to know some people in journalism, and of course Fred Smith I got to know quite well who was in geography geology.
Did you make some other friendships that lasted a long time early on?
Yes, very early I had to know some people.
Jack Grant, who was actually in the
Well, in the oceanography area.
How'd you get acquainted with him?
Well, he ran the reproduction system of oceanography and meteorology, and I had to do some mats and things and diagrams for my dissertation, and he did them for me.
He had all the fancy equipment, and he would do it cheaper than the university would do it.
All right.
Now, describe how you were able to mesh
your new faculty duties, getting ready to have that full workload, and finishing up your dissertation.
Not very well.
Actually, I made great progress
I often tell people this.
We made a grave mistake.
Joanne should have stayed in Austin for at least a year, year and a half.
Maybe we had real cheap housing there.
She had an excellent job.
She enjoyed.
We took her cut in pay to come over here.
And I was working very hard on my dissertation that first six months until she came over in the spring of 64 then.
If she had stayed over there in Austin, I would have probably finished my dissertation in a year, year and a half.
If that she came over, we bought a house.
We had a second child, and things slowed down then considerably then.
So I didn't finish my degree for a few years.
All right.
So she came over at mid-academic year.
That'd be early 64.
Yes.
And you all bought a house?
Over on what was called Redmond Terrace in those days.
It was off Jersey, off the golf course.
And back in those days, houses would have taken, you could buy houses for just picking up the payments.
And we bought a house from a former military man who had put a big down payment down, and we bought it quite cheaply, and it was a nice place.
Do you remember what the price was?
Well, the house had originally been $13.7, something like that, and we got, I think, for $12, and I think, or $11.5, and we put $500 down.
He'd already reduced it.
And it was about?
What in size?
One bathroom with three bedrooms.
And about how many square feet?
Oh, I think 2,000.
It was a big house for us in those days.
And that was a new residential?
Well, it had been built a couple years earlier.
No, but I mean that was a new developed area.
New developed area, yes.
Had Redmond Terrace Shopping?
Redmond Terrace Shopping Center was there, and it was the Cat's Meow at that time.
And what retail establishments were there?
Well, there was a drugstore there, Redmond Terrace Drugstore.
There was a barber shop.
There was a Brookshire Brothers store.
And there was a, oh, well, no, it wasn't academic.
It was not academy.
It was one of those before that then.
Oh, boy, yes.
I had the name of it just a while back, too.
Yes, yes.
But it was there.
Yeah.
And there were some smaller places there as well then.
But Brookshire Brothers and that place took up much of the area then.
Describe how you and Joanne became a part of the community, church and other things.
Well, we started attending St.
Thomas Episcopal Church because it was convenient.
We went down to the church downtown, but it was a long way away, and so we started going to St.
Thomas, which was quite convenient.
It was also associated with the university, so we thought that was probably the best thing to do, and we became active there.
And I eventually became active with the Acolytes there, and Joanne was active with the women.
And I eventually was what Presbyterians call a senior warden, who was the chairman of the vestry at that time.
I served two terms at that.
I was on the vestry, I guess, for six years.
And we became active there.
I became active in a number of organizations.
One of them was the Men's Garden Club, which I'm still active in, and so is Mr. Monroe, and it's been around for a long time now.
And got to know people that way.
I was interested in Indian artifacts and fossils, and so I met a number of people that way.
In fact, I got to know Dean Hubert a little bit better because Hubert was involved in rocks and fossils and things.
How did, how, do you remember how those first acquaintances came about with Hubert?
Hubert always remembered names, not whether it was just me, but Hubert always knew my name.
And I could walk across the campus, and he would say, how are you, Victor?
Now, whether he could do that with every faculty member, I have no idea.
But I got to know him that way then, and I met him, I went to football games, and I worked football games with a number of us from the history department, and I got to know him there.
And Hubert attended football games those days, and I would see his wife there, Mary Julia, and we would chat a few minutes.
And he was a very friendly person in those days.
And then also he had a rock shop.
And I went in the rock shop some and got to know him that way then.
The Rock Shop was already going in those days?
Well, not that early, but I mean, I'm talking down the line some.
Rock Shop was in operation in the 70s, I guess, yeah.
It was over 20, had 25 years, I guess, long in there.
In those early days, did it matter that you had a UT Austin experience?
No, because most people in the department were connected to you.
Dr. Nance seemed to want to hire them, and so I suppose
Uh, my, myself, Garland Bayless, Ray Stevens, uh, Herb Lang.
There was one other one too, Duncan, uh, Tom Miller.
Uh, over half the department's probably graduates from TU.
So, and Nance himself, so, uh, no.
And as political, as the history and government department was divided,
and the new Department of Political Science was created.
What did the people in the History Department think about that?
We're glad.
We were glad.
It was rather acrimonious.
I know the people in government had the idea, and I don't remember all their names now, but we were out to get them and things like that.
They were trying to prevent them from separating, when in reality, everyone would like to see them go.
And so I think that there was some bitterness, and I think history was glad to see them go.
I was so new at that time.
Did this happen, what, 66?
Somewhere.
Very early in there, yeah.
And so I was relatively new and really didn't know it was going on a lot.
So I knew there was some bitterness because I spoke to some of them, and they really felt that they were put upon, and they weren't.
Describe as much as you can recall
early experiences in teaching Aggies?
Well, in those early days, I really liked the Corps because everyone had a name tag.
When I came here, the Corps was no longer compulsory, but nearly all freshmen were Corps members.
And so they all had that little name tag.
And so other than sleeping in class, and that was not only them because I had people sleeping in class the year I
I retired, so it was not that alone, but they would sleep in class frequently because of what they had to go through sometimes, but having name tags was nice, and they certainly were very respectful, and they certainly did not ask any questions out of line, and you didn't have near as much problem with controlling a class in those days, other than I said sleeping, and there was a lot of that going on.
Now, you had taught some sections at UT.